README.md, before:

# Data Translator

This is the first draft of a site outline built with [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org). Gatsby is a free and open source static site generator based on [React](https://reactjs.org). Sites built with Gatsby are modern and _fast_.

## Prerequisites

Git, Node, and Gatsby.

## Project Structure

The portion of the project one mostly interacts with lives within the `src` directory. Its structure is shown below, and the directories described in this document are expanded to their state at the time of its writing.

```bash
src/
├── components/
├── hooks/
├── images/
├── pages
├──── 404.js
├──── about
│     ├── data-translator-consortium.png
│     └── index.md
├──── apis
│     └── index.md
├──── apps
│     ├── icees
│     ├── index.html
│     ├── index.md
│     ├── robokop
│     └── tranql
├──── publications
|   └── index.md
├──── team-science
│     ├── index.md
│     └── translator-teams-slack-communication.png
├──── use-cases
│     ├── cat-ifn-gamma-tnf.png
│     ├── cop-for-isopropyl-alcohol-and-cvd.png
│     ├── icees-asthma.png
│     ├── index.md
│     └── nafld-associations.png
├── styles/
└── templates
    └── default.js
```

## Development

To develop locally, you can spin up a development server by executing `$ gatsby develop` in the project's root directory. The site is served on port 8000 by default.

### Adding Content

#### Pages

Pages can be added by creating [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) files in the `src/pages` directory. The convention for this application is to structure the "pages" within the `pages` directory in their own directories, aligning with the main menu structure. This makes finding things easy. Each page's directory contains an `index.md` file and all images required by that page.

Each markdown file must follow a predefined format, as illusrated below.

```bash
$ cat /src/pages/about-gamma.md
---
path: "/about/gamma"
title: "Gamma"
seo:
    title: "Gamma"
    keywords: "data translator renci"
    description: "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Veritatis, porro!"
---

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Quidem, reiciendis minus, perspiciatis aut eligendi blanditiis esse nobis magnam qui, quam expedita odit, natus temporibus aliquam consequatur porro reprehenderit odio asperiores.
...
```

##### Frontmatter

The first chunk of each page file contains the "frontmatter" in YAML syntax, which lives between the two sets of triple dashes (`---`) and describes metadata unique to each page.

- `path` - This indicates the path the relative broswer will visit to access the page.
- `title` - This defines the page title.
- `seo` - This contains attributes to define properties for [search engine optimization](https://moz.com/beginners-guide-to-seo). The following SEO attributes can be provided on a per-page basis: `description`, `lang`, `meta`, `keywords` (as a comma-separated string), and `title`.
- `template` - This specifies the template used to structure the page content. 

The SEO is required for each page, as is its `title` attribute, being the only thing certainly unique to each page. The remaining attributes will default to the global SEO settings for the site if empty strings are given by a page's frontmatter. For example, if the frontmatter has

```yaml
seo:
    title: "Sample Page"
    description: ""
    keywords: ""
```

then the `description` and `keywords` attributes defined in `/gatsby-config.js` will be used for that page's SEO content.

\* Note the difference between the two `title` attributes: the topmost `title` attribuate is rendered as HTML as the title of the page, in an `<h1>` tag, while the SEO `title` is what is provided to search engines and is what populates `document.title`. 

##### Extending Frontmatter

The frontmatter can be extended to include other metadata that may be important and unique to specific pages. For example, for a blogging application, one way wish to include `date` and `author` entries in the frontmatter.

Below the frontmatter will be the actual [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) syntax that will render as HTML on the page. The `title` in the frontmatter will render as the inner text of an `<h1>` element.

##### Markdown

Below the frontmatter lives the page content. The site builder will understand and render Markdown syntax, including plain HTML and `<style>` tags. Note that CSS variables defined in a page are scoped to that page, and you won't risk global namespace conflicts.

A LaTeX plugin is in place so that mathematical expressions can be freely written inside the Markdown. This will render much prettier than unicode characters.

#### Menu

If a newly created page needs to be added to the site's main navigation menu, it only requires a simple addition to the `gatsby-config.js` file. That file exports an object, and the menu items live in the array defined by `siteMetadata.menuLinks`.

Each element of the `menuLinks` array is an object consisting of `text (the text to be shown in the menu` and the `path` (the route the link will point to). To add a sublist of menu items, simply include a `submenu` property with an array of more menu item objects.

Below is a portion of this menu definition, which illustrates the expected format.

```javascript
menuLinks: [
    {
        text: "Use Cases",
        path: "/use-cases",
    },
    {
        text: "Apps",
        path: "/apps",
        submenu: [
            { text: "ROBOKOP", path: "/apps/robokop", },
            { text: "ICEES", path: "/apps/icees", },
            { text: "TranQL", path: "/apps/tranql", },
        ]
    },
    // ...
],
```

#### Templates

Currently, there is only one template (`src/templates/default.js`), but more can be created by using the default template as a model. Templates are automatically conditionally chosen (based on that template item in the frontmatter in `/gatsby-node.js`.)

\* Note that at least one page needs the template attribute defined so GraphQL knows to grab that attribute. Currently the About page has the template attribute defined, and all others rely on the fallback.

## Deployment

This site is currently deployed to Github Pages with a `gh-pages` Node module. Details on building and deploying the application follow.

Suppose your GitHub username is `jane-doe`, and the name of the repository to which the build will be deployed is `my-cool-repo`. Then after deployment, the site will be acccessible at `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo`.

### Specify the Repo

The repo needs to be added to the main export in `gatsby-config.js` as a property of the main export.

```js
pathPrefix: "/my-cool-repo",
```

This tells Gatsby to prefix the site's routes with your repo name during the build process. For example, users will be accessing the site via routes that look like `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo/about` and `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo/contact`.

### Define the Build Script

Now, we make our lives easier by defining a build script in `package.json`.

The fiollowing custom script

```js
"scripts": {
    "deploy": "gatsby build --prefix-paths && gh-pages -d public"
}
```

tells Gatsby to create the production build of the site, use prefix paths (detailed above), and tells `gh-pages` to push everything in the `public` directory to the `gh-pages` branch of the specified repo.

### Deploy

To deploy the bundled, static version of the site, we can simply execute the following command.

```bash
$ npm run deploy
```

### Issues

I've run into an issue with building and deploying with Gatsby that seems to stem from an out-of-sync cache. I've gotten into the habit of running `$ gatsby clean` (which deletes the `.cache` and `public` directories) before deploying, and I haven't run into this issue since. 

## About Gatsby

Looking for more about Gatsby? Full documentation for Gatsby lives [on the website](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/). Here are some places to start:

- **For most developers, we recommend starting with our [in-depth tutorial for creating a site with Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/).** It starts with zero assumptions about your level of ability and walks through every step of the process.

- **To dive straight into code samples, head [to our documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/).** In particular, check out the _Guides_, _API Reference_, and _Advanced Tutorials_ sections in the sidebar.

## Resources

- Gatsby - [https://www.gatsbyjs.org/](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/)
- React - [https://reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org)
- gh-pages - [https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/how-gatsby-works-with-github-pages/](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/how-gatsby-works-with-github-pages/)
- Markdown - [https://www.markdownguide.org/](https://www.markdownguide.org/)

Commit message:

add note about latering images during development

README.md, after:

# Data Translator

This is the first draft of a site outline built with [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org). Gatsby is a free and open source static site generator based on [React](https://reactjs.org). Sites built with Gatsby are modern and _fast_.

## Prerequisites

Git, Node, and Gatsby.

## Project Structure

The portion of the project one mostly interacts with lives within the `src` directory. Its structure is shown below, and the directories described in this document are expanded to their state at the time of its writing.

```bash
src/
├── components/
├── hooks/
├── images/
├── pages
├──── 404.js
├──── about
│     ├── data-translator-consortium.png
│     └── index.md
├──── apis
│     └── index.md
├──── apps
│     ├── icees
│     ├── index.html
│     ├── index.md
│     ├── robokop
│     └── tranql
├──── publications
|   └── index.md
├──── team-science
│     ├── index.md
│     └── translator-teams-slack-communication.png
├──── use-cases
│     ├── cat-ifn-gamma-tnf.png
│     ├── cop-for-isopropyl-alcohol-and-cvd.png
│     ├── icees-asthma.png
│     ├── index.md
│     └── nafld-associations.png
├── styles/
└── templates
    └── default.js
```

## Development

To develop locally, you can spin up a development server by executing `$ gatsby develop` in the project's root directory. The site is served on port 8000 by default.

### Adding Content

#### Pages

Pages can be added by creating [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) files in the `src/pages` directory. The convention for this application is to structure the "pages" within the `pages` directory in their own directories, aligning with the main menu structure. This makes finding things easy. Each page's directory contains an `index.md` file and all images required by that page.

Each markdown file must follow a predefined format, as illusrated below.

```bash
$ cat /src/pages/about-gamma.md
---
path: "/about/gamma"
title: "Gamma"
seo:
    title: "Gamma"
    keywords: "data translator renci"
    description: "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Veritatis, porro!"
---

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Quidem, reiciendis minus, perspiciatis aut eligendi blanditiis esse nobis magnam qui, quam expedita odit, natus temporibus aliquam consequatur porro reprehenderit odio asperiores.
...
```

##### Frontmatter

The first chunk of each page file contains the "frontmatter" in YAML syntax, which lives between the two sets of triple dashes (`---`) and describes metadata unique to each page.

- `path` - This indicates the path the relative broswer will visit to access the page.
- `title` - This defines the page title.
- `seo` - This contains attributes to define properties for [search engine optimization](https://moz.com/beginners-guide-to-seo). The following SEO attributes can be provided on a per-page basis: `description`, `lang`, `meta`, `keywords` (as a comma-separated string), and `title`.
- `template` - This specifies the template used to structure the page content. 

The SEO is required for each page, as is its `title` attribute, being the only thing certainly unique to each page. The remaining attributes will default to the global SEO settings for the site if empty strings are given by a page's frontmatter. For example, if the frontmatter has

```yaml
seo:
    title: "Sample Page"
    description: ""
    keywords: ""
```

then the `description` and `keywords` attributes defined in `/gatsby-config.js` will be used for that page's SEO content.

\* Note the difference between the two `title` attributes: the topmost `title` attribuate is rendered as HTML as the title of the page, in an `<h1>` tag, while the SEO `title` is what is provided to search engines and is what populates `document.title`. 

##### Extending Frontmatter

The frontmatter can be extended to include other metadata that may be important and unique to specific pages. For example, for a blogging application, one way wish to include `date` and `author` entries in the frontmatter.

Below the frontmatter will be the actual [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) syntax that will render as HTML on the page. The `title` in the frontmatter will render as the inner text of an `<h1>` element.

##### Markdown

Below the frontmatter lives the page content. The site builder will understand and render Markdown syntax, including plain HTML and `<style>` tags. Note that CSS variables defined in a page are scoped to that page, and you won't risk global namespace conflicts.

A LaTeX plugin is in place so that mathematical expressions can be freely written inside the Markdown. This will render much prettier than unicode characters.

#### Menu

If a newly created page needs to be added to the site's main navigation menu, it only requires a simple addition to the `gatsby-config.js` file. That file exports an object, and the menu items live in the array defined by `siteMetadata.menuLinks`.

Each element of the `menuLinks` array is an object consisting of `text (the text to be shown in the menu` and the `path` (the route the link will point to). To add a sublist of menu items, simply include a `submenu` property with an array of more menu item objects.

Below is a portion of this menu definition, which illustrates the expected format.

```javascript
menuLinks: [
    {
        text: "Use Cases",
        path: "/use-cases",
    },
    {
        text: "Apps",
        path: "/apps",
        submenu: [
            { text: "ROBOKOP", path: "/apps/robokop", },
            { text: "ICEES", path: "/apps/icees", },
            { text: "TranQL", path: "/apps/tranql", },
        ]
    },
    // ...
],
```

#### Templates

Currently, there is only one template (`src/templates/default.js`), but more can be created by using the default template as a model. Templates are automatically conditionally chosen (based on that template item in the frontmatter in `/gatsby-node.js`.)

\* Note that at least one page needs the template attribute defined so GraphQL knows to grab that attribute. Currently the About page has the template attribute defined, and all others rely on the fallback.

## Deployment

This site is currently deployed to Github Pages with a `gh-pages` Node module. Details on building and deploying the application follow.

Suppose your GitHub username is `jane-doe`, and the name of the repository to which the build will be deployed is `my-cool-repo`. Then after deployment, the site will be acccessible at `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo`.

### Specify the Repo

The repo needs to be added to the main export in `gatsby-config.js` as a property of the main export.

```js
pathPrefix: "/my-cool-repo",
```

This tells Gatsby to prefix the site's routes with your repo name during the build process. For example, users will be accessing the site via routes that look like `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo/about` and `jane-doe.github.io/my-cool-repo/contact`.

### Define the Build Script

Now, we make our lives easier by defining a build script in `package.json`.

The fiollowing custom script

```js
"scripts": {
    "deploy": "gatsby build --prefix-paths && gh-pages -d public"
}
```

tells Gatsby to create the production build of the site, use prefix paths (detailed above), and tells `gh-pages` to push everything in the `public` directory to the `gh-pages` branch of the specified repo.

### Deploy

To deploy the bundled, static version of the site, we can simply execute the following command.

```bash
$ npm run deploy
```

### Issues

I've run into an issue with building and deploying with Gatsby that seems to stem from an out-of-sync cache. I've gotten into the habit of running `$ gatsby clean` (which deletes the `.cache` and `public` directories) before deploying, and I haven't run into this issue since. 

This same issue may occur if, during development, there is an update to an image file for which Gatsby has already run its image processing. Just clean things out and try re run the build or develop command, e.g., `$ gatsby clean && gatsby develop`.

## About Gatsby

Looking for more about Gatsby? Full documentation for Gatsby lives [on the website](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/). Here are some places to start:

- **For most developers, we recommend starting with our [in-depth tutorial for creating a site with Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/).** It starts with zero assumptions about your level of ability and walks through every step of the process.

- **To dive straight into code samples, head [to our documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/).** In particular, check out the _Guides_, _API Reference_, and _Advanced Tutorials_ sections in the sidebar.

## Resources

- Gatsby - [https://www.gatsbyjs.org/](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/)
- React - [https://reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org)
- gh-pages - [https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/how-gatsby-works-with-github-pages/](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/how-gatsby-works-with-github-pages/)
- Markdown - [https://www.markdownguide.org/](https://www.markdownguide.org/)
